# The Use and Misuse of Cell Phone Tracking Data in the Prevention of Covid-19

In this assignment, I will respond to two articles that are focused on how cell phone location tracking is being used by governments in the fight against covid. The first article was written early on in the pandemic and highlights the pros and cons of this process. The second article, written earlier this year, explores how many of the fears of misuse that came with this process were realized.

## Article 1
[COVID-19 Phone Location Tracking: Yes, It’s Happening Now—Here’s What You Should Know](https://www.forbes.com/sites/zakdoffman/2020/03/27/covid-19-phone-location-tracking-its-moving-fast-this-is-whats-happening-now/?sh=6a78c40911d3) by Zak Doffman *via* **Forbes**

This article comes just as this topic was being realized, only 3 months after the first cluster of cases was reported in Wuhan. It explores how Governments are using cell phone location data to track some of the biggest contributors to the spread of the virus, such as population density in a given area and travel patterns. In an attempt to assuage the associated fear that comes with being tracked, the author acknowledges that, although this data can be used in an indivually identifying way, the current (as of March 2020) use of this technology is broadly anonymous by default or anonymized before analysis. However, he also identifies that although anonymity is (was) the current state of affairs, more invasive tracking could be argued for to prevent further spreading of the disease. 

Something not mentioned in the article is how this level of tracking (or surveillance) is already used in other realms. A primary example being how Google Maps uses amalgamated and anonymized tracking data from those using the service to detect and report things such as traffic in a given area<sup>1</sup>. There is an important distinction there however, as google maps is an elective service (even if many people don’t know how to turn the tracking off), while this new government tracking is often coming directly from cell carriers, without user consent or opt-out, and in Israel’s case, is directly based on their ‘counter-terror tech’.  The author holds a fairly neutral stance, saying that the debate between safety and security ‘will now run’ and believes the use of this tracking will be ‘pulled back’, but to what extent is still unclear.   

## Article 2
[Governments Tap Covid Data for Other Uses, Risking Backlash](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-01-31/governments-exploit-covid-data-for-other-uses-risking-backlash) by Jamie Tarabay *via* **Bloomberg**  

While the previous article was written right on the heels of the initial Covid-19 cases and the early uses of cell phone tracking, this article, written mere days ago, is able to give a more current view of the situation. This article is more focused, reviewing the tracking process in Singapore and it’s intended and unintended consequences. Singapore reacted to the pandemic very quickly and designed and released an app (TraceTogether) to improve contact tracing data. This app was initially very transparent, both ‘publish\[ing\] the source code and promised strict limits on data use.’ However, new uses of the data, such as in a murder investigation, have been leaked. While this could have chalked up to a mistake or slip up, the government apologized, but also introduced legislation to allow this type of use in the future. This reaction hints that the government was always okay with this misuse of data, but would only admit it if they were caught, or if people complained. 

The author also express fear that this misuse of data may be almost contagious, as other countries see how effective Singapore was both at initial data collection, and at transforming that process for their own needs. This fear is further expressed by the author simply quoting Singapore’s Minister for Foreign Affairs in saying “Especially in very serious cases, and where lives are at stake, it is not reasonable for us to say that certain classes of data should be out of reach of the police.” However, citizens do not seem to agree, saying that this is only possible because of covid, slipped in during a pandemic, and comparing the country to “North Korea with a smile”. While not mentioned in the article, there is a clear parallel here to the removal of rights during previous national and global catastrophes, such as wars, and the current compromises of rights during a pandemic. The author focuses on how these betrayals are leading to less use of these technologies, in users just ‘turning them off’ when at home. However the larger issue may not be that of abandonment of the technology by the public, but the ingraining of these technologies (and all of their misuse) into our legislation and future laws. In some good news, the author also mentions how some countries are preventing misuse in their legislation, including Israel, who was mentioned in the last article as using their ‘counter-terror tech’ for Covid prevention. 





*<sup>1</sup> https://electronics.howstuffworks.com/how-does-google-maps-predict-traffic.htm*